---
layout: post
comments: true
title:  "Inaugural meeting"
date:   2017-10-06 22:00:00 -0700
author: Ariel Rokem
---

# The first meeting of the Neuroinformatics Working Group

The first meeting of the WG was on Thursday, October 5th. The focus of the
meeting was to get to know each other, to brainstorm about the kinds of things that we might do together during the course of the quarter, and to make

The meeting started with everyone introducing themselves. We had about 20
participants, from a variety of career stages (from freshman students to
professors and research staff!) and a variety of departments (neuroscience,
biomedical and health informatics, biology, computer science and engineering,
...).

We divided into small groups to discuss:

1. What we were hoping to do during the quarter and further

2. What we think "neuroinformatics" is.

The latter question brought up a few interesting discussion points.

## Defining neuroinformatics

One of the topics for discussion in smaller groups was the definition of neuroinformatics. Some of the things that came up:

- What is the distinction between neuroinformatics and bioinformatics? One of the important distinctions seems to be the tackling of spatial and temporal aspects of neural data, which are fundamental to neuroinformatics. In contrast, bioinformatics primarily deals with molecular sequence data. The considerations, tools and techniques are therefore quite different.

- What is the distinction between neuroinformatics and computational
neuroscience? One important distinction seems to be the domains of expertise
that are required in neuroinformatics, which include such things as data
management and data visualization. My own personal take on this distinction is
that computational neuroscience is about understanding the computational
principles that govern brain activity and its relationship to behavior, while
neuroinformatics is primarily about using computational tools to understand
the brain. Of course, computational neuroscience often uses neuroinformatics
in its practice, but there are other disciplines of neuroscience (e.g.,
clinical neuroscience) that may care less about the computational details of
the algorithms implemented by neural circuits, but still require computation
to analyze their data.

- In contrast to some other cognate disciplines, neuroinformatics focuses on
technical tools and methodologies, rather than specific scientific questions
related to the brain.

- A point that came up several times is that neuroinformatics is about dealing
with large data-sets. This also emphasizes the importance of data management
and data base systems in our future discussions.
